---
Sports Ethics
---

Sports is not just a game, it is a platform that teaches one how to handle tense situations, how to think for the entire team even before oneself, how to be disciplined, how to keep oneself calm and not react even after being agitated and how to follow a routine. Sports Ethics is the set of rules leading to fair play which is mandatory for everyone to follow. The players are expected to give their complete commitment in all forms of sport.

People often confuse with the role of ethics in sports because they misinterpret the word sportsmanship. Sportsmanship is the model which depicts that a sport both encourages and demonstrates character development and also influences the moral character of the individual and community on a broader whole. The way one competes in a sport has an effect on their personal moral and ethical behavior irrespective of the competition. Another term is gamesmanship where the only motto is winning and it may involve unfair means like tampering with the sports goods, taking steroids in case of athletics, faking an injury or agitating the opponent. Many people consider this as unethical since they are all classified under malpractice.

Sports has a humongous impact on our culture, feelings and beliefs and makes us realize what we fundamentally consider good or bad. In sports ethics, rules and regulations are very important. One has to abide by the rules in order to get through the tournament, but the question is how, many people ethically or morally abide by them. Many feel that sports demonstrates the moral character and conduct of a person and their personal integrity as well as show responsibility of one's actions and performance during the game.

There have been numerous instances where the case of ethics has come into question. Let us start with the India vs Australia cricket matches that have have always witnessed maximum sledging. All of us know about the “monkey” incident between Harbhajan Singh and Andrew Symonds. This issue was so serious that the matter had to be taken to the courts. Sledging is against the rules and the players are expected to behave themselves and show the opponent or answer them from their game and not words. Agitating and provoking the players is wrong. Between the same teams similar incident happened recently when James Faulkner said something to Virat Kohli and Kohli replied by saying > “I have smashed you enough in your life. Now go and bowl.” It is very easy to understand that when one is playing at such a big level they are bound by tons of pressure and passion but turning that passion into positive energy is what should do the trick most of the time. While mentioning ethical behavior of players we cannot miss out the 2009 Australian Open when Rafael Nadal defeated Roger Federer and Federer ended up crying in the presentation ceremony; that time Nadal in his speech thanked Federer and boosted up his confidence and morale and shared his trophy with him too despite being the opponent. Such gestures are what that make the game go and keep alive the spirit of sportsmanship. Or the most recent Cricket T20 World Cup where the West Indians won, they supported each team and encouraged them to play thus maintaining good relations and fair play amongst each other because of which at the end they won hearts of every player along with their trophy.

When talking about sports we cannot forget about the gender discrimination that lies in each and every sport. Girls are often looked down upon and it is considered that they do not play as good as the boys hence there are separate teams for boys and girls. We have also seen mixed matches in games like lawn tennis or table tennis. Now, considering one section of the society stronger/ weaker than the other is also unethical. In the Harry Potter books, the best thing about their game Quidditch is that there are no separate teams for boys and girls, all play together in a single team. But, when considering fair play we have altered the rules for para athletes and it is fair because they each para athlete/player has a different level of deformity and making all of them compete against each other is completely unfair. For example we cannot make someone who is partially visually impaired compete with someone who cannot see at all. It will be the same as someone on steroids on a normal match having advantage over the other. 

Last comes the question whether skills is everything required to win a game? Money matters has constantly been that one factor where everybody fumbles and all their ethics and morale go grass grazing. In a sport like Formula One it is more about the wealthy team getting a better car and equipment and making use of better technology than others. Shouldn’t skill of driving the car perfectly win over money? This thing kills the spirit of game as science and technology should never overcome the skills and brain of a person; because ultimately science has evolved from the skilled brain of various individuals only. The fact that wealthier teams can provide better doctors, gyms, trainers and sports kits should not overpower the talent one has for the game.

Professionalism is important but doing that at the expense of the talent and virtues of an individual is wrong. The love for the game should always be the top priority as the players are a part of the sporting community because of their love and passion for the game. No matter how hard the times are or how much the pressure is, they should not resort to unfair means or do morally incorrect or unethical deeds and forget the sole reason why they choose the happiness of victory and seeing the smile on others after their participation in the first place.
